Mortality may seem like a straight forward concept, but there is quite some intricacy to it. This paragraph relies heaviliy on the textbook by [Preston, Heuveline and Guillot](https://www.amazon.com/Demography-Measuring-Modeling-Population-Processes/dp/1557864519). In the context of demography, mortality represents [frequency of death in a population](https://www.britannica.com/science/mortality-demography). To faciliate comparison, mortality is usually measured as a period rate, the number of deaths in the population in a period per number of Person-years lived in the population in the same period. The denominator then is a composite of the size of the population and the  period of interest, commonly one year. In practice, precise denominator values tend to be unavailable, as this would require information on the population membership status of each member throughout the year; therefore, the denominator is normally estimated by the mid-year population. If we wish to compare period mortality rates over time and between countries, it is good to consider the fact that they depend also on the age and sex structure of the populations being compared. Since an individual's probability of death increases with age and male sex, a population's mortality rate increases as the proportion of older or male individuals increases. To deal with this, population mortality rates are commonly standardised by age and sex. Standardisation requires knowledge of age and sex-specific mortality rates (e.g., mortality rate of 30-year old men), which are then used to reconstruct a virtual standardised population, which has the same age and sex structure for all real populations being compared. With this, we are comparing the mortality conditions by each age and sex category instead of proportions of these categories between the populations we are studying. This matters because what we want to investigate (and, hopefully, policy makers want to improve) are the mortality conditions themselves, since they reflect of the average health status (i.e., risk of death) in each of the age and sex categories. I will leave my discussion of mortality here, to be revisited in a future post.

theory of demographic transition. In its phenomenological version, the theory states that a large sustained reduction in mortality is followed by a reduction in fertility. While this may describe the development of many populations, historical and current, it is not particularly helpful for identifying what drove the mortality reduction, so it may be helped along by policy, for example. The fundamental version of the theory proposes some mechanisms for the underlying drivers of the phenomenon, which [Thomas Burch](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65433-1_1) summarises as: "modernisation, economic growth, secularisation, individualism, technological developments in medicine and fertility control, and so forth" (p. 12). Since books have been written on the topic (e.g., [Caldwell 2007](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-1-4020-4498-4.pdf)), I won't delve much deeper. On the whole, the theory has a different purpose to my research question, as it focuses on the interplay of mortality and fertility, and aims to be general in scope. I therefore turn elsewhere to find models/theories that more precisely address the question of mortality convergence in the EU.
