---
layout: "post"
title: "Complex systems science and (political) epidemiology"
date: "2020-07-31 10:27"
---

In the [previous post](), I had a closer look at the emergence of political epidemiology and the the new methodological challenges it presents. At the core of the issue is the question of how to bring the societal context into our studies. This requires methods that can deal with multiple interacting causes (i.e., various social policies), relationships between individuals, organisations, and institutions, and the fact that social structures both shape individuals and are shaped by them. These challenges have become increasingly well-recognised in the field of epidemiology over the past decade, which has led some epidemiologists to embrace the tools of complex systems science, most notably systems modeling. This post will provide some insight into these discussion and tools, and reflect on the emerging best practices for their utilisation.

Are socio-political systems complex systems? Most epidemiologists would argue that yes, including [Diez Roux](https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwu270):

>   [P]opulations are systems in which individuals interact with each other and with their environment, so understanding the drivers of health (and the most effective ways to improve health) requires consideration of the systems within which health is generated.

This realisation is important, because the usual approach to science - one that also underlies randomised-controlled trials - is one of reductionism. This approach states that once we understand the constitutent parts of a system, we will understand the system. In other words, there is no difference between the whole and the sum of its parts. Most commonly used statistical models in public health rely on this philosophy and assume things noninterference (no interaction between individuals) and unidirectionality of causal effects. However, this systems-naïve approach has repeatedly failed to gain purchase in many contemporary health challenges, including obesity, addiction, gun violence, and others. As [Marshall and Galea argue](10.1093/aje/kwu274):

>   [I]t is increasinglyclear that these problems are characterized by complex, multifactorial processes that are highly resistant to interventions that address only one or a few causal effects. Therefore, multiple, highly interdependent causal pathways, which are fundamental characteristics of complex systems, are integral to the challenges that public health now faces. To this end, the application of complexity theory to understand how disease is generated and reproduced within populations systems has begun to gain traction and currency.

In the same article, the authors call for the use of agent-based models (ABMs) to begin to tackle these issues, finding them:

>   [Methodologically congruent] with macro- and eco-social frameworks that position health as a production of intersecting and interacting biological, social, and environmental factors.

Indeed, AMBs have very exciting properties, most of which rely on the fact that they explicitly simulate the mechanisms that we hypothesise are at the root of the scientific questions being pursued. The advantages of ABMs include their ability to generate (and explain!) emergent population-level behaviours like phase transitions, cope with the differences between agents and types of agents (e.g., people and organisations), model agents adapting their behaviour to changes in the environment, and incorporate existing social networks between the agents.

Of course, not all is sunshine and rainbows. ABMs are not at all easy to design and build. The core characteristic that awards ABMs their flexibility - the explicit simulation of mechanisms - makes them very data intensive and easy to misuse. This is why a lot of the recent discussion in epidemiology has been framed in terms of the accuracy of estimates AMBs generate relative to other more established methods. A key publication in this space is the [Murray et al. study](https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwx091) that compared the accuracy of causal effect estimates using ABMs with the "gold standard" causal inference tool of the parametric g-formula. They showed that ABMs have some disadvantages when applied to the standard causal inference tasks.

However, the invited commentaries by [Edwards et al.](https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwx089) and [Keyes et al.](https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwx090) argued that causal estimation within a well-measured population contained in a single dataset is not really what ABMs are or should be used for. Instead, one would normally use ABMs to extrapolate to novel situations (albeit the extrapolated effects may not be unbiased), explore the possible mechanisms that may have led to the observed population-level results ([alethic possibilities](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=74veYsfmCCo)), and identify gaps (missing data or theory) in our understanding of phenomena. Keyes et al. used a fantastic metaphor:

>   The parametric g-formula is like a late model sedan—perhaps a long-range, electric luxury car—offering a high-technology yet practical way to get from point A to point B over established roads. By contrast, an ABM is an off-road vehicle, capable not only of following the same roads as the luxury car (albeit less comfortably) but also of taking riskier excursions into uncharted territories where the wheels might fall off. Epidemiologists whose scientific questions can be answered within the constraints of the g-formula can avoid hazardous and unsupported assumptions with a g-formula approach. By contrast, epidemiologists whose questions require stronger assumptions must accept the consequent inferential hazards.

[Hernán](https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwu272) framed this question in terms of relative reliance on data and theory. The standard epidemiologic approaches are deeply (but not wholly!) reliant on data. When the questions are too complex, however, epidemiologists may need to rely more on theory and strong assumptions, and find good ways of dealing with the threat of model misspecification and biased estimation - many of which have already been developed in other disciplines (e.g., [Windrum et al.](http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/10/2/8.html)). [Diez Roux agrees](https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwu270) that establishing the relationship between the model and reality is at the core of the challenge. However, she also emphasises that the very process of building the models, no matter how flawed they end up being, may be a great teacher:

>   The beauty of systems modeling is that it can help us understand the plausible implications of the knowledge that we have and how pieces may act together inways that we might not have predicted from our understanding of each component separately. It can help us integrate quantitative and qualitative information and explore basic dynamics. It can generate new questions or hypotheses that can be subsequently investigated through new observations or experiments. Perhaps most importantly, the process of building a system models forces us to think about dynamic relationships, feedback, adaptivity, interference, and the ways in which they might play a role in the process we are studying. In this sense, systems modeling is a healthy antidote to the obfuscation that can result from too much simplification, from thinking that the world really functions like a regression equation (rather than that regression equations are useful tools that can help us understand some aspects of how the world functions).

The key message is therefore one of complementarity between traditional and systems approaches, especially as increasing amounts of data become available to parametrise ABMs. As Cerdá and Keyes reflect in a recent piece on the promise of data science in epidemiology:

>   By combining publicly accessible central data repositories with area and person-level prediction and causal frameworks, applying careful and systematic validation methods, and integrating systems science modeling into the broader epidemiologic armamentarium through an iterative data collection—modeling—data collection—modeling—intervention—evaluation—modeling process, we can develop valid and reliable systems models that can inform policy priorities.

Complex systems approaches, of course, go far beyond the use of specific tools like ABMs. For example, I have not touched upon the incredible work done with other modelling approaches, like systems dynamics models (see the wonderful review by [Darabi and Hosseinichimeh](https://doi.org/10.1002/sdr.1646)). Instead of naively adopting tools from other disciplines, [Naimi](https://doi.org/10.1097/EDE.0000000000000538) argues that we should seek a deep engagement with complex systems science first. He cites Shannon (the information theorist) to deliver a warning:

>   Shannon [...] long ago cautioned that the increasingly widespread application of concepts and tools of his field to other scientific domains, although exciting, carried “an element of danger.” Establishing interdisciplinary applications of information theory, he argued, “is not a trivial matter of translating words to a new domain,” but requires “a thorough understanding of [its] mathematical foundation” and “the slow and tedious process of hypothesis and experimental verification.”

I, for one, am excited to embark on this journey of a deeper undestanding of complex systems science and look forward to finding how it can be bridged with political epidemiology and demography to shine some light on the mechanisms mortality convergence in Europe.
